.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" fmfconv.1: fmfconv man page
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Gergely Szasz
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\"
.\" E-mail: szaszg@hu.inter.net
.\"
.\"
.TH fmfconv 1 "10th September, 2010" "Version 0.10.0.2" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
fmfconv \- Fuse movie file converter
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" the trend for long-option-using programs is to give a largely
.\" generic synopsis, so...
.PD 0
.B fmfconv
.RI [ options ]
.P
.PD 1
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
fmfconv is a Fuse movie file converter. It can convert .fmf files to
any video file format know by FFMPEG.
...
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.\" dual short/long option listings here reflect the GNU approach,
.\" as used in info files. It does mean using RS/RE, though,
.\" so this is used for all options (for consistency).
.\"
.\" the options list is in alphabetical order by long option name (or
.\" short option name if none).
.\"
.I \-h
.br
.I \-\-help
.RS
Give brief usage help, listing available options.
.RE
.PP
...
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH BUGS
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH FILES
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR fuse "(1),"
.IR gzip "(3),"
.PP
The comp.sys.sinclair Spectrum FAQ, at
.br
.IR "http://www.worldofspectrum.org/faq/index.html" .
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
