.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" rzxtool.1: rzxtool man page
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Philip Kendall
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\"
.\" E-mail: pak21-fuse@srcf.ucam.org
.\" Postal address: 15 Crescent Road, Wokingham, Berks, RG40 2DB, England
.\"
.\"
.TH rzxtool 1 "16th August, 2002" "Version 0.5.0" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
rzxtool \- Modify properties Sinclair ZX Spectrum input recording files
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PD 0
.B rzxtool
.RI "[-a " snapfile ]
[ -e ] [ -r ] [ -u ]
.I rzxfile
.P
.PD 1
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Rzxtool allows modification or extraction of the snapshot embedded in
an RZX input recording file and/or (un)compression of the data stored
in the file.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.I -a snapfile
.RS
The .SNA or .Z80 format snapshot specified in
.I snapfile
will be added to the RZX file, replacing any snapshot which is
currently present in
.IR rzxfile .
The new RZX file will be output to standard output.
.RE
.PP
.I -e
.RS
The snapshot present in
.I rzxfile
will be output to standard output in .Z80 format. This option is
incompatible with the
.IR -a ", " -r " and " -u
options.
.RE
.PP
.I -r
.RS
Any snapshot present in
.I rzxfile
will be removed, and the new RZX file output to standard output.
.RE
.PP
.I -u
.RS
When outputting an RZX file, this option causes the input recording
data to be output uncompressed; if this option is not given, the data
will be compressed using
.IR zlib "(3)."
.RE
.PP
.I rzxfile
.RS
specifies an input recording file whose contents are to be listed.
.RE
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH BUGS
None known
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR fuse "(1),"
.IR rzxdump "(1),"
.IR tzxlist "(1),"
.IR xspect "(1),"
.IR xzx "(1),"
.IR zlib "(3)"
.PP
The comp.sys.sinclair Spectrum FAQ, at
.br
.IR "http://www.srcf.ucam.org/~pak21/cssfaq/index.html" .
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Philip Kendall (pak21-fuse@srcf.ucam.org).
