.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" tzxlist.1: tzxlist man page
.\" Copyright (c) 2001,2002 Darren Salt, Philip Kendall
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\"
.\" E-mail: pak21-fuse@srcf.ucam.org
.\" Postal address: 15 Crescent Road, Wokingham, Berks, RG40 2DB, England
.\"
.\"
.TH tzxlist 1 "15th December, 2001" "Version 0.4.0" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
tzxlist \- Sinclair ZX Spectrum "real" tape file lister
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PD 0
.B tzxlist
.IR "tzxfile" ...
.P
.PD 1
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Tzxlist outputs a description of the contents of TZX tape files.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I tzxfile
specifies a tape file whose contents are to be listed.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH BUGS
None known.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR fuse "(1),"
.IR xspect "(1),"
.IR xzx "(1)"
.PP
The comp.sys.sinclair Spectrum FAQ, at
.br
.IR "http://www.srcf.ucam.org/~pak21/cssfaq/index.html" .
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Philip Kendall (pak21-fuse@srcf.ucam.org).
.PP
Darren Salt wrote this man page.
